README.md, before:

# Moneta

Generate and visualize billions of memory accesses with this project built on PIN and HDF5.

## Getting Started

First clone the repository.
```
git clone https://github.com/NVSL/CSE141pp-Tool-Moneta

cd CSE141pp-Tool-Moneta
```

Build the Docker image and name it `memorytrace`.
```
docker build -t memorytrace .
```

<a name="port"></a>Start a detached docker container named `memtrace`. Take note of the `XXXX:8888` in the command. the `XXXX` will be your port number for running the notebook. The port number will be `8080` here but can be changed if there are any conflicts.
```
docker run --detach --name memtrace -p 8080:8888  -v "$PWD":/home/jovyan/work --user root -e GRANT_SUDO=yes -e JUPYTER_ENABLE_LAB=yes memorytrace bash -c "while true; do sleep 10;done"
```

**Windows:** Run the following instead:
```
MSYS_NO_PATHCONV=1 docker run --detach --name memtrace -p 8080:8888  -v "$PWD":/home/jovyan/work --user root -e GRANT_SUDO=yes -e JUPYTER_ENABLE_LAB=yes memorytrace bash -c "while true; do sleep 10;done"
```

Connect to the container.
```
docker exec -it memtrace bash
```

**Windows:** You may need add `winpty` if prompted:
```
winpty docker exec -it memtrace bash
```


## For Devs Only

See Setup/ and documentation/

Commit message:

Updated READMES for Docker setup, moneta, .setup, Examples, pin_makefiles; Added -O0 to Makefile

README.md, after:

# Moneta

Generate and visualize billions of memory accesses with this project built on PIN and HDF5.

## Getting Started

### Building the Image
First clone the repository.
```
git clone https://github.com/NVSL/CSE141pp-Tool-Moneta
cd CSE141pp-Tool-Moneta
```

Build the Docker image and name it `moneta-img`.
```
docker build -t moneta-img .
```


### Building the Container

Due to the way Windows interprets paths, these next few instructions may differ slightly depending on your operating system. If you are using Windows, [skip to this section](#windows).

<a name="port"></a>Start a detached docker container named `moneta`. **Take note of the `####:8888` in the command.** The `####` will be your **port number** for running the notebook. The port number will be `8888` here but can be changed if there are any conflicts. **Note that you will have to change the Jupyter Notebook URL port to the port set here when you run the `moneta` command.**
```
docker run --detach --name moneta -p 8888:8888  -v "$PWD":/home/jovyan/work --user root -e GRANT_SUDO=yes -e JUPYTER_ENABLE_LAB=yes moneta-img bash -c "while true; do sleep 10;done"
```

Connect to the container.
```
docker exec -it moneta bash
```

#### <a name="windows"></a>Windows: Run the following instead

```
MSYS_NO_PATHCONV=1 docker run --detach --name moneta -p 8888:8888  -v "$PWD":/home/jovyan/work --user root -e GRANT_SUDO=yes -e JUPYTER_ENABLE_LAB=yes moneta-img bash -c "while true; do sleep 10;done"
```

To connect to the container, you may need be prompted to use `winpty`:
```
winpty docker exec -it moneta bash
```

## Developers
 - Amithab Arumugam
 - Ashwin Rao
 - Christie Lincoln
 - Elvis Tran
 - Jad Barrere
 - Kevin Tang
 - Sam Liu
 - Stephanie Hernandez
